<strong>Section 2 </strong>

Good afternoon. I’m James Harrison and welcome to “Your Hometown”, the programme where we explore a place near you.

Today we’re going to visit Quartztown, one of the busiest little towns in the country. Situated on the wild remote southwest coast, Quartztown is set amongst stunning scenery with a backdrop of towering mountains and lush forests.  Although it wasn’t established before the eighteenth century, it’s packed in a lot of action since then.

Quartstown was first founded by gold miners who discovered the precious metal in the Rift River in 1860. At the height of the gold rush Quartztown boasted a population of 26,000. In 1865 there were more than 100 pubs and just 1 library. Once the gold rush was over the town settled into a quieter but just as prosperous era. In 1873 the railway reached Quartztown connecting it to the capital city, Warrington. This development enabled the growth of agriculture in the gentle valleys of the coastal region in the twentieth century. The main economic activities became forestry, farming, fishing and coal mining. The Delmer coalmine is the largest opencast mine in the country and provides employment to 32% of Quartztown’s working age population.

The town experienced a decline in population in the last couple of decades of the twentieth century owing to developments in the traditional primary industries. For example, dairy farming has become less labour intensive with larger herd sizes and the greater mechanisation of farming processes. This led to decline in the population numbers with many young people moving away to pursue employment opportunities. However, there has been a dramatic reversal of the town’s fortunes in the last two decades with tourism and outdoor activities drawing huge numbers of tourists and thrill seekers into the area.

Since <strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q16: 1994]</strong> Quartztown has hosted a midwinter festival which brings thousands of visitors to the town. Celebrating the longest night of the year, the midwinter festival kicks off with a colourful parade of vividly costumed characters. Music is provided by bands from the town’s high school, the army base and local musicians. Many <strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q17: local businesses]</strong> sponsor floats in the parade which usually feature themes relating to the district and its history. Interactive light displays are staged at various locations, with vibrant projections screened onto local buildings and monuments. And the night ends with a magnificent <strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q18: fireworks]</strong> display designed by the world famous pyrotechnician, Waldo Emerson.

The parade heralds two weeks of celebration.  A skating rink is installed in the town’s main square and every night during the festival parties will be held at the rink with music mixed by the internationally renowned DJ, Soulbass. The Quartztown alpine ski and board competition is run at nearby Mt Davenport. Events include the giant slalom, downhill and freestyle skiing.  Also on the mountain is a “bikes on snow” event, where mountain bikers engage in a thrilling downhill race. The Long Neck marathon which attracts competitors from around the globe is staged in the stunning Long Neck Valley. All these competitions have been generously supported by international and local sponsors. For the less sports minded there is also a craft fair, a readers’ and writers’ event which is usually attended by the year’s Man Booker prize winner and concerts by the Warrington Symphony Orchestra. Visitors can also take either walking or <strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q20: horse-back]</strong> tours of the historical gold mining areas, and even try their hands at panning for gold. There’s a lot going on.

We are going to go now to the town’s mayor, Maisie Bates, for her view of this year’s midwinter festival.

&nbsp;