<div class="transcript"><strong>Section 2</strong>

Thank you very much for inviting me here today. l understand that you all own your own home, and some of you may be interested in buying additional property here in the city, so I hope you will find the information l am going to share with you useful and informative. I am going to talk about the situation with property here in the city. The city centre of any area is obviously going to have the highest prices and as more and more people are competing for houses in this area, both renting and buying are becoming increasingly difficult.

It is most people’s dream to, one day, own their own house. House ownership gives us a feeling of having achieved something and we can see clearly what we have worked so hard for all our lives. It can give us a sense of security for our old age and a knowledge that we will hopefully have something to pass on to our children. However, buying a house, particularly for first-time buyers, is becoming more and more difficult, not only due to increasing prices but also because of the need for a substantial deposit. For younger people, buying their first home is very difficult and often impossible. Young couples who cannot get the deposit together, need to rent for a long time and sometimes forever. While, traditionally, homes near the centre of the city have been the most desirable, people are now looking further afield. This has happened for a number of reasons, the main one being that our style of work is changing along with that of other countries such as the USA. In certain professions, for example sales and computing, it is no longer necessary for people to be based in an office full-time. More and more people are beginning to work from home which means they can avoid the hustle and bustle of rush-hour traffic jams into work and have more freedom to choose to live in a more rural and peaceful location.

My company deals with finding property for both purchasers and renters in the city area. One of my main roles within the company is to find investment properties for people who wish to plan ahead for their future.

<hr />

An investment property is usually at the <strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q16: cheaper]</strong> end of the market. People buy investment properties, not to live in, but in addition to their own home in order to rent it out to other people.

The advantage of putting your savings into property for the future is that you can be pretty certain that, as a long-term investment, your money will safely increase in value in line with inflation. Many people are turning to property investment instead of pension schemes as we hear the horror stories of countries such as the UK, where people have invested all their lives into their pension schemes to find that now their money is relatively worthless.

Houses automatically earn what is known as capital gains; that is, for every year you own the property, it becomes more valuable and often gives a better rate of interest on your money than most banks do. However, that is not to say there are no risks. There are people who buy property when the market is high and prices are inflated beyond their true value, only to find that when the housing market slows down, they are in a state of negative equity. Negative equity is a situation that arises when you owe more for the house than the house itself is worth.

In short: the best advice is to be aware of the ups and downs of the housing market. Property investment, if handled correctly, can be enormously satisfying. I hope that this has given you an insight into the basics of the property market. Thank you for listening. Please raise your hand if you have any questions and I will try to be of assistance.

&nbsp;</div>