<div class="transcript"><strong>Section 3</strong>

FIONA:      Hi Robert, long time no see! How are you?

ROBERT:   Fine, thanks… and you?

FIONA:      Great! Really great! How are your classes going this semester?

ROBERT:   Good, on the whole. I’ve never really had any problems with mathematics… or chemistry either, for that matter. I’m finding my economics course a bit of a struggle though.

FIONA:      I see. Well, I don’t envy you! You must be spending an awful lot of time in the library. I’m glad that I changed my major to communications last semester! Have you thought about asking your tutor for some assistance? Mine’s been really helpful.

ROBERT:   I’ve tried. I went to see her during her office hours and she wasn’t there… then I sent her an email and I got a reply saying that she’s away at a conference until the end of next week. Now I’m not sure how I’m going to finish my essay!

FIONA:      Oh dear! Well, I may be able to help you. I did economics last year before I changed my major, remember?

ROBERT:   Really? That’d be great if you could. How much do you know about the music industry, Fiona?

FIONA:      That’s your topic?

ROBERT:    Yes. We didn’t have much choice… it was either that or the tourism sector for this assignment… and now I have to write two and a half thousand words by the end of next week!

FIONA:       Two and a half thousand? That doesn’t sound too bad, Robert! I did my essay for the same economics paper on the fishing industry. Perhaps I can give you some general advice… steer you in the right direction…

ROBERT:    Oh, yes please! If you could that would be great. I’ve been working on this paper for three weeks and I still feel as though I haven’t made any progress… and now there’s only one week left until the deadline!
FIONA:      Okay, let’s see… the first one I was thinking of is by Jackson. Tom Jackson. It’s called “Principles of Economics” and that was published in 2008 by Oxford University, if I remember correctly.

ROBERT:  Wow, Fiona! You certainly do have a good memory, much better than mine I have to say. Let me just write it down in my notebook here… what was the title again?

FIONA:    “Principles of Economics” by Jackson.

ROBERT:  Right, got it! That’s great… anything else?

FIONA:     Well, there’s “Economics Research” from Cambridge University. I’m sure you would’ve heard of it. It was published in 2013. It’s a key text for most economics papers, you know…

ROBERT:  Yes, it does ring a bell… I should’ve paid more attention during my lectures! What’s the author’s name? It’s Jane something isn’t it?

FIONA: Yes, that’s right. It’s Jane Kumar.

ROBERT: How do you spell that?

FIONA: Kumar. K-U-M-A-R. Would you like me to spell the title for you as well?

ROBERT: Ha-ha, no… that’s fine. I think I’ve got it. Was there anything else?

FIONA: Well, I’m sure you know about Michaela Petty’s book... the one on statistics from the University of Sydney?

ROBERT: Hmmm… no, I don’t think so. Do you think it would be helpful?

FIONA: Definitely. It will be useful as a general reference and it’ll be a good look for the tutor to have it in your bibliography.

ROBERT: I see. Petty, you said. You don’t know the title and year it was published, by any chance?

FIONA: That’s easy. Her book is called “Statistics”. It was published in 2006, although I’m sure there have been later editions put out by other universities. You should be able to find all three of those on reserve at the library.

ROBERT: Fiona, you’re a lifesaver! Thank you so much for helping me out with this essay. I suppose I’d best be getting along to the library now before it closes… I’ve got a deadline to meet after all…</div>