<strong>Section 4</strong>

Good afternoon I’m Jake Ackerman and I’m going to talk to you today about a Twentieth century architectural movement, the Bauhaus which has had a profound impact on contemporary design.

The term, <em>Bauhaus</em>, in German means ‘house construction’ or ‘art of building’, but it also alludes to<em> Bauhutt</em>, the name of a medieval stonemasons guild. Originally the Staatliches Bauhaus, to give it its full name, was an art school set up by German architect, Walter Gropius. Gropius had previously been appointed director of the Grand Ducal School of Arts and Crafts in Weimar in 1915. Under Gropius the school was merged with the Weimar Academy of Fine Art in 1919 to become the Bauhaus.

As the previous name of the school suggests it had been inspired by the English Arts and Crafts movement lead by William Morris, who advocated traditional craftsmanship and the use of simple forms with no distinction between function and form. Another influence on the Bauhaus was the Russian Constructivist art and design movement which saw art as a social practice and not one that is divorced from all other aspects of life. The most important cultural movement shaping the Bauhaus, however, was Modernism, which rejected traditional and classical art and design practices as irrelevant to the modern industrial world. This quest to merge art and design with functionality led Gropius to state that the Bauhaus ‘strives to collect all artistic creativity into a unity, to reunite all artistic disciplines – sculpture, painting, design and handicraft – into a new architecture”.

Ironically perhaps, the Bauhaus was originally intended to be a school which combined architecture with art and craft but in the first few years of the school there were no architecture classes.  What architectural output there was, was produced by Gropius and his architectural partner Adolf Meyer. Among the first members of the faculty were eminent artists, including sculptor Gerhard Marcks and painters Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky.  The programme was both experimental and theoretical. The initial curriculum included a foundation course in the first year where students were introduced to colour theory and basic principles of design. The students also experimented with many materials and processes. This was followed by a further 2 years of design specialisation.

Gradually, by the early 1920s, the Bauhaus style was moving away from traditional craftwork and leaning more towards functional modern design which suited the new industrial age. Gropius, who remained the director until 1928, set out to produce beautiful functional objects which anyone could afford. One example of this was his F-51 chair which he designed for the Bauhaus director’s room.  Its boxy, cantilevered form is like a piece of sculpture and it remains timelessly modern even after almost one 100 years. It is emblematic of Gropius’ state-of-art construction techniques.

By this time the fundamentals of the Bauhaus style were emerging. Sparse and undecorated, Bauhaus architecture favoured the functional and asymmetrical. Typically cubic, sometimes curved and open plan, with smooth facades in a single primary colour, usually white. This style became also known as the International Style.

The city of Weimar had long been the seat of artistic endeavour, having been the home of the German Enlightenment in the 18th century. It drew musicians, artists and writers throughout the 19th century and after World War I it became the site of the new democratic republic of Weimar. In this period it thrived as a liberal centre of arts and culture. However by 1924 with the rise of conservative political pressures the Bauhaus’ funding was halved and the staff given short term contracts. Gropius closed the school in Weimar and offered the school up to other cities.

Gropius chose the industrial city of Dessau as it commissioned him to design and build his own school. The city provided funding and a development site for the building as well as another for three semi-detached houses for faculty members. The city remains the owner of both these properties. In 1994 the building became the Bauhaus Dessau Foundation for experimental design, research and teaching and 2 years late was declared a UNESCO World Cultural Heritage Site.

It was at Dessau that the Bauhaus style was cemented, its architectural productivity increased and the school gained profitable commissions, particularly under the new leadership of Hannes Meyer who replaced Gropius as the head when he retired. Throughout the 1920s the school flourished, but by the beginning of the following decade, political changes meant the school was forced to close.

&nbsp;

&nbsp;