<strong>Section 4</strong>

Good morning everyone. Welcome to our third lecture in this series on contemporary concepts in science. Today we are going to examine some relatively new ideas which have entered the scientific lexicon. To begin with we’ll look at what has become known as the Goldilocks Effect or Principle.

Most of you will be familiar with the fairy-tale of “Goldilocks and the Three Bears” where a little girl strays into the bears’ house and samples their food and furniture. She tests each of the bear’s porridge, chairs and beds to find the one that suits her best, the one that is “just right”. Well the concept of things being ‘just right’, of falling within certain optimal limits, neither too extreme nor too simple has been termed the Goldilocks effect  and it has crept into scientific language in a wide range of fields.

One of the earlier uses of the term was by ecologists seeking to explain a number of different phenomena. In 2008, Eric Berlow and his colleagues entitled a paper, <em>The “<strong>Goldilocks factor</strong>” in food webs</em>. In this work they use the concept to explain how stable food chains in natural environments come into being, in other words what determines who eats who. It was found that body size is strongly linked to this question, so that predators eat creatures which are smaller than them but not too small. Thus a shark would eat a seal but probably not bother with shrimp.  Another group led by Gabrielle Katz used the expression to explain why streams in Arizona which had variable water flows supported more species of plant life than those that were consistently wet or dry.

Earth scientists have also been employing the phrase to describe the conditions that create a liveable planet. It has been theorised that the Earth hasn’t become an unendurably hot planet like Venus, nor a freezing cold one like Mars is partially due to the role of the greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, in the geological cycle. It has been known for some time that CO2 is absorbed by mountain ranges and other large land masses and that volcanoes emit CO2. More recently it has been discovered that new rock which is pushed up in the process of geological upheaval releases a large amount of CO2 also. Due to the Earth’s self-regulating cycle, it has been dubbed the Goldilocks planet. This has received some condemnation for ignoring the facts of current climate change, and by making it seem we can continue to pump out greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.

Astrobiologists have extended the concept into their search for other inhabitable planets, and other intelligent life forms. Planets that would qualify as Goldilocks planets would be not too big nor too small, they’d be the right distance from their star for life to exist and they’d have water. That is, they would be “just right” to sustain life.  It should be noted though that some planets which fall into this category could also be ‘gas giants’ like Jupiter and would be uninhabitable due to their toxic gassy environments. NASA’s Kepler space observatory has the task of exploring our galaxy in order to discover other Goldilocks planets. Possibly 40 billion such planets could exist according to estimations based on the data received from Kepler.

Recently psychologists at the University of Rochester have applied the term to observations of very young children’s attention behaviour. By measuring the eye movements of a group of 7 and 8 month old babies watching video animations of increasing complexity the researchers were able to gauge when the infants would stop watching a video.  The children would lose interest if the video was too simple, or too complex or surprising. Thus videos that captured the children’s attention were ‘just right’, the right mixture of <u>novelty</u> ( not boring or frightening) and <u>challenge</u> (not too familiar or too confusing). Steven Piantoadosi, one of the researchers, states that their findings have wider implications for other types of learning, where the ideal materials for learning should be ‘just right’, stimulating but not too difficult.

Now whether the Goldilocks principle is truly a scientific law, or a description of a certain state or just a buzz word is still open to debate. However, it is becoming an increasing popular expression. Medical science has adopted it to refer to the optimal dose of a medication. Economics has jumped on the bandwagon with Goldilocks economies, Goldilocks markets, Goldilocks pricing and Goldilocks marketing, all of which set out the perfect factors for economic wellbeing. It has been used in TED talks by cultural commentators to describe the best balance of independence and closeness in personal relationships. Goldilocks theory is becoming ubiquitous, just google it, but for all that it may merely be post-hoc theorising. That is, tailoring a theory after the fact, where things are explained in a way that can’t be tested, particularly in the field of human behaviour. Using such a theory a researcher could interpret observed patterns of behaviour as they choose, and state that the desired behavioural outcome is the result of a perfect balance of conditions. Or as one commentator has put it, when you see Goldilocks, <u>look out</u>.

Now, I want to look at the Higgs Boson, the so-called god particle…

&nbsp;