<div class="transcript"><strong>Section 2</strong>

Good morning everyone. <strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q20: I]</strong> would first like to welcome you to the Glengarret distillery, where some of the world’s finest whisky is produced all from local ingredients. Later on in the tour there will be a chance to sample some of our range of whiskies, but we’ll begin by looking at the history of our distillery.

For many people, Scotland is perhaps most famous for its whiskies. The word ‘whisky’ actually came from a Gaelic word which, when translated, means ‘Water of Life’. A combination of traditional methods and the soft spring water used in the production of traditional Scotch whisky has made it a world favourite; in fact, exports of whisky in 2007 accounted for 2.5 billion pounds – that’s nearly 80 pounds a second!  There are two main types of whisky; single malt or blended. Single malt whisky, as the name implies, uses only one type of grain in its production, and is completed as a single process. Blended whisky, on the other hand, can use a variety of different single malt whiskies and combine them. Many people believe the taste of a single malt whisky to be much finer than a blend, despite the fact that more blended whisky is sold than single malts.

The first recorded reference to whisky dates as far back as 1494, but since that time many refinements have been made to the process of making whisky. Using the term ‘Scotch’ to refer to whisky has a very specific meaning. It is internationally protected, and only whiskies made in Scotland, using largely local ingredients, can be classified as ‘Scotch’. Despite strict regulations about using the term ‘Scotch whisky’, it is legally acceptable to use barley from any part of the world to create a Scotch whisky, but here at Glengarret we only use local barley. It is more expensive than importing it from other countries, but it gives our product the unique taste for which it is world famous.

This region has been producing whisky since the 1750s, although Glengarret has been operating for just over 200 hundred years, having been started in 1807 by three brothers. Apart from the introduction of more modernised equipment, the whisky process here at Glengarret has changed only a little since those times. The company remains small, employing fewer than 25 people, with most of our staff being the third or even fourth generation of their family to work in the distillery.

Now we will move on to how our whiskies are made and where we get our 100% natural ingredients from. I would like to ask you to keep your questions until the end of this part of the tour – there will be plenty of time for questions later on. Now if you’<strong style="background-color: yellow;">[Q18: d]</strong> all like to follow me, we’ll start the tour.

One of the most important ingredients in whisky is barley. The barley being used for the production of whisky is carefully selected as it will largely determine the quality of the whisky when it is ready for sale. The first step towards making the whisky is when the barley is ‘malted’. This process takes a few days, during which time the barley is spread out on the malting room floor as you can see here.

After about three days, this is then dried out. The malted barley is laid on racks inside the kiln, a special furnace used for drying, and it is here that a lot of the taste of a whisky is determined. Here at Glengarret, we use peat – a type of soil rich in vegetation that gives the whisky a very smoky flavour. The dried malt is then taken to the dressing room, where the pure malt is separated from unwanted material and other debris. From the dressing room, the malt is then sent to the mill to be ground down into a coarse flour called grist. The grist is then fed into the mash tun, along with hot water, where it is stirred for some hours. This process is repeated three times. The remaining product is then put into wash backs, and yeast is added to start the fermentation process. This is then distilled, before being put into oak casks to mature. Some of our older whiskies may take up to 18 years to mature properly.

OK, this is the end of this part of our tour. If anyone has questions, then please....

&nbsp;</div>