

Read the texts and answer the questions. Type your answers in the spaces provided.

Reading Passage 1

The pressure on Junior Doctors
In comparison with the lives of other postgraduate students, the life of a student doctor is far from easy. Despite the heavy workload, it seems that the more you learn, the more you realise what you still need to study, meaning that it becomes increasingly complex and difficult as the course progresses. As a result, it is not unusual for students to drop out. Misguided teachers attempt to simplify matters, but this can then result in incomplete understanding in an environment that demands the very best of its practitioners, and this can cause the situation. The situation is little better in the year or two years after qualifying. Poorly paid for such long hours, many junior doctors find themselves becoming disillusioned with medicine. The more depressed they become, the more likely they are to look elsewhere for a career, wasting up to seven years of training and education. An unfortunate statistic is that of those that qualify as doctors, 18% do not remain in the profession for more than three years. The problem can be more clearly defined by considering specific examples. In New Zealand and Britain, for example, the exodus of medical graduates is leaving the remaining newly qualified doctors with responsibilities that are beyond their capacity. In statistics from 1998 over half the graduates from one medical school in New Zealand left the country immediately after qualifying, and hospitals are really beginning to feel the shortage. Certain hospitals in Auckland, for example, do not have enough staff to cover the timetable, and some of the newly qualified doctors are finding themselves on call for 48 hours straight. In Britain, the situation is equally bleak. The structure of the health service itself is the most important factor to be taken into account when considering the number of migrating British medical graduates. Junior doctors are required to take mentors, more senior doctors (often consultants), to act as supervisors. They are entrusted with the educational supervision of doctors in their first year of practice and are responsible for ensuring the application of the principles of good medical practice. However, when interviewed, slightly less than 60% of junior doctors had any positive feedback on the relationship. The remaining respondents described situations in which a consultant was accused of making unreasonable demands, bullying, being unfair, or being sexist. In more extreme cases, the consultant was portrayed as incompetent, insensitive or negligent towards patients. A healthy mentoring relationship is likely to provide the mental and moral challenges essential to continuing self-improvement. But such statistics may encourage junior doctors to conclude that role models may not be a dependable way to impart professional values, attitudes and behaviour. Indeed, a survey of just under 200 nearly qualified doctors highlights significant gaps in their knowledge and understanding of basic care. It was found that many junior doctors do not know the signs indicating a patient is critically ill, a third of respondents failed to answer a question on how to deal with someone who was unconscious and none of the trainees identified all of the steps involved in using an oxygen mask. In New Zealand, the situation, although having essentially the same effect of fewer junior doctors, has different causes. There are two main factors which explain this mass migration of medical graduates from New Zealand. The first factor is the student loans system where a medical graduate can leave university having accumulated a loan of anything up to NZ$60 000 in the course of training. By leaving the country, such graduates have the option of at least delaying the repayment of those loans. The other reason is the long hours. The stories of working hours a week being almost in the three-figure mark are often not exaggerated, and this is a situation which is worsening the fewer junior doctors there are. In New Zealand, at least, a solution is being sought at a student level. The New Zealand Medical Students Association (NZMSA) is a national body that aims to advance the long-term interests of medical students and act as their advocate on a political level. Composed of students elected from the Otago and Auckland Medical Schools, the NZMSA aims to find a balance between the demands of the profession and the expectations of junior doctors. At a recent conference, the Association concluded that increasing student numbers or attracting overseas doctors is too short term to be successful and the roots of the problem need to be addressed, specifically in the area of student debt. Either way, there is no doubt that a solution is needed and needed quickly, not just in Britain and New Zealand, but in most countries.
Reading Passage 1 You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1 – 17 which are based on Reading Passage 1.
Questions 1 – 17 Questions 1 – 11 Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer? Write YES if the statement agrees with the writer NO if the statement does not agree with the writer NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage.

    Medical courses are as difficult as any other postgraduate course. BLANK 1 of 17
    For student doctors, the course becomes easier the more you learn. BLANK 2 of 17
    A number of students do not complete the course. BLANK 3 of 17
    Better teachers know how to simplify the course. BLANK 4 of 17
    Once qualified, the situation for junior doctors slightly improves. BLANK 5 of 17
    Junior doctors are poor. BLANK 6 of 17
    Disillusioned doctors often move to another hospital to work. BLANK 7 of 17
    The majority of students had nothing positive to say about their mentors. BLANK 8 of 17
    The root of the problem in New Zealand and Britain is essentially the same. BLANK 9 of 17
    Many junior doctors are unable to repay their student loans. BLANK 10 of 17
    The NZMSA has found a balance between expectation and reality. BLANK 11 of 17

Questions 12 – 14 Complete the following text using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the text. A significant number of graduates from New Zealand and Britain are not remaining in the medical field. Poor relationships with (12) BLANK 12 of 17, student loan repayments and increasingly long (13) BLANK 13 of 17 are all contributory factors. The NZMSA is attempting to find an answer to the problem, but is wary of supporting ideas it perceives to be only (14) BLANK 14 of 17 solutions Questions 15 – 17 Answer the following questions using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS OR A NUMBER.

    In which year did over 50% of newly qualified doctors from a medical school in New Zealand leave the country? BLANK 15 of 17
    How are members of the NZMSA chosen? BLANK 16 of 17
    Where are two-day shifts not uncommon? BLANK 17 of 17

Reading Passage 1

The pressure on Junior Doctors

In comparison with the lives of other postgraduate students, the life of a student doctor is far from easy. Despite the heavy workload, it seems that the more you learn, the more you realise what you still need to study, meaning that it becomes increasingly complex and difficult as the course progresses. As a result, it is not unusual for students to drop out. Misguided teachers attempt to simplify matters, but this can then result in incomplete understanding in an environment that demands the very best of its practitioners, and this can cause the situation.

The situation is little better in the year or two years after qualifying. Poorly paid for such long hours, many junior doctors find themselves becoming disillusioned with medicine. The more depressed they become, the more likely they are to look elsewhere for a career, wasting up to seven years of training and education. An unfortunate statistic is that of those that qualify as doctors, 18% do not remain in the profession for more than three years.

The problem can be more clearly defined by considering specific examples. In New Zealand and Britain, for example, the exodus of medical graduates is leaving the remaining newly qualified doctors with responsibilities that are beyond their capacity. In statistics from 1998 over half the graduates from one medical school in New Zealand left the country immediately after qualifying, and hospitals are really beginning to feel the shortage. Certain hospitals in Auckland, for example, do not have enough staff to cover the timetable, and some of the newly qualified doctors are finding themselves on call for 48 hours straight. In Britain, the situation is equally bleak.

The structure of the health service itself is the most important factor to be taken into account when considering the number of migrating British medical graduates. Junior doctors are required to take mentors, more senior doctors (often consultants), to act as supervisors. They are entrusted with the educational supervision of doctors in their first year of practice and are responsible for ensuring the application of the principles of good medical practice. However, when interviewed, slightly less than 60% of junior doctors had any positive feedback on the relationship. The remaining respondents described situations in which a consultant was accused of making unreasonable demands, bullying, being unfair, or being sexist. In more extreme cases, the consultant was portrayed as incompetent, insensitive or negligent towards patients.

A healthy mentoring relationship is likely to provide the mental and moral challenges essential to continuing self-improvement. But such statistics may encourage junior doctors to conclude that role models may not be a dependable way to impart professional values, attitudes and behaviour. Indeed, a survey of just under 200 nearly qualified doctors highlights significant gaps in their knowledge and understanding of basic care. It was found that many junior doctors do not know the signs indicating a patient is critically ill, a third of respondents failed to answer a question on how to deal with someone who was unconscious and none of the trainees identified all of the steps involved in using an oxygen mask.

In New Zealand, the situation, although having essentially the same effect of fewer junior doctors, has different causes. There are two main factors which explain this mass migration of medical graduates from New Zealand. The first factor is the student loans system where a medical graduate can leave university having accumulated a loan of anything up to NZ$60 000 in the course of training. By leaving the country, such graduates have the option of at least delaying the repayment of those loans. The other reason is the long hours. The stories of working hours a week being almost in the three-figure mark are often not exaggerated, and this is a situation which is worsening the fewer junior doctors there are.

In New Zealand, at least, a solution is being sought at a student level. The New Zealand Medical Students Association (NZMSA) is a national body that aims to advance the long-term interests of medical students and act as their advocate on a political level. Composed of students elected from the Otago and Auckland Medical Schools, the NZMSA aims to find a balance between the demands of the profession and the expectations of junior doctors. At a recent conference, the Association concluded that increasing student numbers or attracting overseas doctors is too short term to be successful and the roots of the problem need to be addressed, specifically in the area of student debt. Either way, there is no doubt that a solution is needed and needed quickly, not just in Britain and New Zealand, but in most countries.

Reading Passage 1

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1 – 17 which are based on Reading Passage 1.

Questions 1 – 17

Questions 1 – 11

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer?

Write

YES if the statement agrees with the writer
NO if the statement does not agree with the writer
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage.

    Medical courses are as difficult as any other postgraduate course. Fill in the blank 1 of 17 (no)
    For student doctors, the course becomes easier the more you learn. Fill in the blank 2 of 17 (no)
    A number of students do not complete the course. Fill in the blank 3 of 17 (yes)
    Better teachers know how to simplify the course. Fill in the blank 4 of 17 (no)
    Once qualified, the situation for junior doctors slightly improves. Fill in the blank 5 of 17 (yes)
    Junior doctors are poor. Fill in the blank 6 of 17 (not given)
    Disillusioned doctors often move to another hospital to work. Fill in the blank 7 of 17 (no)
    The majority of students had nothing positive to say about their mentors. Fill in the blank 8 of 17 (no)
    The root of the problem in New Zealand and Britain is essentially the same. Fill in the blank 9 of 17 (no)
    Many junior doctors are unable to repay their student loans. Fill in the blank 10 of 17 (not given)
    The NZMSA has found a balance between expectation and reality. Fill in the blank 11 of 17 (no)

Questions 12 – 14

Complete the following text using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the text.

A significant number of graduates from New Zealand and Britain are not remaining in the medical field. Poor relationships with (12) Fill in the blank 12 of 17 (mentors,their mentors,mentor,their mentor), student loan repayments and increasingly long (13) Fill in the blank 13 of 17 (hours,working hours) are all contributory factors. The NZMSA is attempting to find an answer to the problem, but is wary of supporting ideas it perceives to be only (14) Fill in the blank 14 of 17 (short-term,short term) solutions

Questions 15 – 17

Answer the following questions using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS OR A NUMBER.

    In which year did over 50% of newly qualified doctors from a medical school in New Zealand leave the country? Fill in the blank 15 of 17 (in 1998,1998)
    How are members of the NZMSA chosen? Fill in the blank 16 of 17 (elected,elections,by elections,by election)
    Where are two-day shifts not uncommon? Fill in the blank 17 of 17 (auckland,in auckland)

Incorrect 0 / 17 Points

    No
    No
    Yes
    No
    Yes
    Not given
    No – the text states that disillusioned doctors look elsewhere for a career, wasting up to seven years of training and education.’ – they didn’t move to another hospital, they quit the medical practice.
    No
    No – ”In New Zealand, the situation, although having essentially the same effect of fewer junior doctors, has different causes.”
    Not given – the text refers to how junior doctors often leave the country to delay repaying their loans, but there is no reference to them being unable to pay their them.
    No – the key here is in the language used. If the NZMSA ‘aims to’ find a balance, then this is referring to the future, but the grammar of the question is ‘has found’ which suggest this was completed in the past, which therefore is not true.
    Mentors
    (working) hours
    short term
    1998
    Elected / election
    Auckland

