SECTION 1 – PART A
Reading Text 1

Request for Unwanted but Useful Items for School Jumble Sale

Dear Householder,

As part of this year’s fund-raising event, Edgehill College will be holding a jumble sale on May 24th. All profits will be used to assist in funding the new children’s playground in the centre of town.

We are now requesting donations of unwanted but useful items of usable quality to sell at our jumble sale stalls. Donations are requested in the following categories:

Clothes – Please place washed items in bags or boxes and mark them For Men, For Women or For Children.

Kitchenware – Any items are of use (e.g. plates, cups, glasses, cooking utensils, kitchen equipment such as food mixers etc). These items are currently in short supply.

Books – Complete books only (no missing pages). We are especially looking for children’s novels.

Miscellaneous – Ornaments, pictures, toys, games, handbags etc. Please place items in boxes and clearly write the names of the items on the box.

We will also be collecting food to donate to the local homeless shelter. If you wish to make a food donation, please provide tinned, dried or packet foodstuffs only. Please do not donate food items that are likely to spoil.

If you are able to, please bring your donated items to the school reception Monday to Friday between 9.30am and 3.00pm. Otherwise, for larger loads, if you are unable to get to the school, we can arrange for a member of the team to collect your items. Please ring 762 8894 and ask to speak to Mr William Taylor, our School Liaison Officer, who will arrange for one of our volunteer parents to pick up your donation.

On a final note, we are also still looking for additional volunteers to take care of stalls on the day of the jumble sale. The event will take place between 9.30am and 2.00pm. If you are free on that day and willing to help out, please contact the Deputy Headmistress Mrs Jayne Browne on 762 8889.

Thank you in advance for your help and support. We look forward to seeing you on May 24th.

Best wishes,
Karl Blackman
Headmaster

Questions 1–4

[Section 1 Part A – Reading Text 1.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: Matching statements to visual items.
There are 4 questions (1–4).
There are 4 answer options labelled A–D (pictures provided separately).
Each answer option is used once only.
Each question requires one letter only.
All questions refer to Reading Text 1 only.]

Should only be packaged in boxes.

The school does not have many of these items to sell at the moment.

Should be labelled in one of three ways.

The school wants more of these which would be suitable for youngsters.

Questions 5–9

[Section 1 Part A – Reading Text 1.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: TRUE / FALSE / NOT GIVEN.
There are 5 questions (5–9).
Each question has exactly one correct answer.
Answer options must be displayed as: TRUE, FALSE, NOT GIVEN.
All questions refer to Reading Text 1 only.]

The event is being held to raise money for school facilities.

The school is collecting fresh fruit and vegetables to donate to a homeless shelter.

Items will be picked up by volunteers between 9.30am and 3.00pm.

Mr William Taylor will make arrangements for items to be collected.

All helpers for the event are now confirmed.

SECTION 1 – PART B
Reading Text 2

Examples of Books Available at Edgehill School Jumble Sale

Book A – A children’s story suitable for those who have recently started to learn to read. The story follows a young hero travelling across Europe.

Book B – A reference book for art enthusiasts, with historical accounts and illustrations of European masters.

Book C – A large educational book covering science, history, geography and art, including quizzes.

Book D – A guide to lesser-known hiking tracks for outdoor enthusiasts.

Book E – A camping handbook with information on cooking and accommodation.

Book F – An academic comparison of ancient Egyptian and Greek art.

Book G – A creative activity book for children, covering art and craft projects.

Questions 10–14

[Section 1 Part B – Reading Text 2.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: Matching descriptions to titles.
There are 5 questions (10–14).
There is a shared list of 9 answer options labelled I–IX.
Each answer option may be used once only.
Each question requires one Roman numeral only.
All questions refer to Reading Text 2 only.
An example is provided and must not be counted as a question.]

Book B

Book C

Book D

Book F

Book G

SECTION 2 – PART A
Reading Text 3

Corbridge Teacher Training Course

The Corbridge teacher training course runs over four weeks and gradually increases both teaching responsibility and assessment pressure.

Week 1 – Introduction to different teaching methodologies and styles. Trainees observe and discuss teaching but do not teach.

Week 2 – Classroom practice begins. Trainees teach short lessons to small groups and submit the first draft of Assignment 1.

Week 3 – Intensive grammar study begins. Trainees teach larger groups, are formally assessed, and submit Assignment 1.

Week 4 – Trainees deliver five assessed lessons and submit Assignment 2, which must be computer typed.

There is a high dropout rate beginning in Week 3, which increases in Week 4 due to the pressure of assessment.

Questions 15–17

[Section 2 Part A – Reading Text 3.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: Matching statements to time periods.
There are 3 questions (15–17).
There is a shared list of 4 answer options labelled A–D (Week 1–Week 4).
Answer options may be used more than once.
Each question requires one letter only.
All questions refer to Reading Text 3 only.]

The first assignment must be completed.

The first assessed teaching is done.

Different ways of teaching are demonstrated.

Questions 18–20

[Section 2 Part A – Reading Text 3.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: TRUE / FALSE / NOT GIVEN.
There are 3 questions (18–20).
Each question has exactly one correct answer.
Answer options must be displayed as: TRUE, FALSE, NOT GIVEN.
All questions refer to Reading Text 3 only.]

Assignment 1 can be handwritten.

The grammar training is easy for native speakers.

The fourth week has the most trainees quitting the course.

SECTION 2 – PART B
Reading Text 4

Staff Training Sessions

Starting the 3rd of next month, there will be a number of training sessions for all staff. Attendance at the first and second sessions is compulsory, as well as one additional session chosen from the remaining options.

Session 1 – Dealing with complaints
Facilitated by Ms Weldgrove. Focuses on correct procedures following recent incidents. Held in the main conference room.

Session 2 – Company image
Led by Mark Lorins. Covers upcoming changes to branding, stationery and uniforms. Held in the conference room.

Session 3 – Word processing suite
Training in new software by Gordon Sumner, with a guest speaker from MacroSwift. Limited to 70 places. Held in the computer room.

Session 4 – Internal communication systems
A refresher course run by Jane Williams with Ruth Madocs from HR. Held externally at the Logan Hotel.

Questions 21–23

[Section 2 Part B – Reading Text 4.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: Multiple choice (single answer).
There are 3 questions (21–23).
Each question has 4 options labelled A, B, C, D.
Only one option is correct per question.
All questions refer to Reading Text 4 only.]

21. Staff…
A. must attend all sessions
B. must attend only the first and second session
C. do not have to attend if they make arrangements with their supervisor
D. must attend three sessions

22. The first session…
A. is about how to make a complaint
B. has been arranged because of previous problems
C. will be held outside the company
D. is likely to have few attendees

23. The third session…
A. is the only one to have two facilitators
B. will have two speakers from another company
C. is already fully booked
D. has limited seating

Questions 24–26

[Section 2 Part B – Reading Text 4.
This is a closed question set.
Question type: Classification.
There are 3 questions (24–26).
There is a shared list of 4 answer options labelled A–D (Session 1–Session 4).
Each question requires one letter only.
Each answer option may be used more than once.
All questions refer to Reading Text 4 only.]

A. Session 1
B. Session 2
C. Session 3
D. Session 4

Which session will not be held in the company?

Which session will have two facilitators from within the company?

Which session is intended to prepare staff for future changes?
